# Singh-Embryo-is-selection-arena-2021
# computational codes used for the analysis of selection arena paper.
# Abstract : 
The transcripts from transposable element (TE), both transpositionally-competent TEs (Young TEs), and noncoding TEs such as primate-specific endogenous retrovirus (HERVs) are abundant in the early human embryo (EHE). It remains unclear whether the TE activation is functionally irrelevant or contributes to EHE development. For instance, as seen in mouse oocyte atresia, TEs could also create a context for selection. Here, we seek to fully define the cell types while explicitly testing the TEmediated selection hypothesis within the EHE. This we do via analysis of single-cell transcriptomic, epigenomic data, and from visualizations of EHE. Our results uncover a ~20% of cells, eliminated shortly after embryonic gene activation with the usual apoptotic hallmarks, and hence is prevented from contributing to the embryo. Prior to apoptosis, these non-committed cells (NCCs) express transpositionally-competent Young TEs, DNA-damage response, and pro-apoptotic genes. The viable ontogenetic sisters form the pluripotent Inner Cell Mass (ICM) and express RNA-editing mediated TE suppressors APOBEC3C/G/H and the non-transposing TE HERVH. The activation of Young TEs upon HERVH knockdown (KD) and their suppression under HERVH over-expression (OE) indicate that HERVH has been recruited as part of a repression mechanism targeting Young TEs. Physical looping of HERVH enhancer with the promoters of APOBEC3G and H mediated by cohesin provides substantial evidence that HERVH is co-opted as an enhancer in human pluripotency. Manipulation of human embryonic cells by HERVH-KD mimics NCC and demonstrates TE transposition followed by DNA damage and induction and pre-apoptosis. We rescue the DNA damage and apoptosis levels in HERVH-OE cells. Blocking of transposition reduces the signals of damage and apoptosis, indicating a causative link between Young TE activity and cell death. With no similar evidence in mice, comparative early embryology provides a model to understand the phylogenetic occurrence of clonal arenas and characterizes the uncontaminated in vivo pluripotent cells.
